The Project Gutenberg eBook of Reminiscences of the Chattanooga
Campaign, by Isaac C. Doan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Reminiscences of the Chattanooga Campaign

Author: Isaac C. Doan

Release Date: May 15, 2022 [eBook #68095]

Language: English

Produced by: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REMINISCENCES OF THE
CHATTANOOGA CAMPAIGN ***





  REMINISCENCES
  OF THE
  Chattanooga Campaign.

  A Paper Read at the Reunion of Company B,
  Fortieth Ohio Volunteer Infantry, at
  Xenia, O., August 22, 1894,

  BY
  SERGEANT ISAAC C. DOAN.

  RICHMOND, IND.:
  PRINTED AT J. M. COE’S PRINTERY,
  1894.




REMINISCENCES.

THE CHATTANOOGA CAMPAIGN.


On a balmy autumn day--September 18th, 1863, while the Chattanooga
Valley lay nestled within its rugged mountain borders, bathed in the
mellow rays of the Southern sun, the First Brigade, First Division of
the Reserve Corps, broke camp near Crawfish Springs, and moved out
along the Ringgold road.

This brigade was composed of the Fortieth Ohio, Eighty-fourth Indiana,
Ninety-sixth and One Hundred-and-fifteenth Illinois Infantry.

Late in the afternoon, just as the head of the column reached
Chickamauga River, the sharp crack of a rebel picket gun rang out upon
the air. The column halted, and almost immediately we saw a mounted
officer riding rapidly toward us from the front, the ranks opening at
his approach. As he reached our company (B, Fortieth O. V. I.) he spoke
to our Captain who at once gave the order: “Company B, forward--double
quick--march!”

Upon reaching the head of the column we saw the dead body of a Union
soldier, lying upon his face, his life-blood mingling with the dust of
the road.

We crossed the stream and deployed as skirmishers, while on our
right was deployed a company of the Ninety-sixth Illinois. We moved
cautiously through the thicket until we reached a fence beyond which
was an open field with stumps every few minutes, from behind which the
Johnnies were firing salutes in honor of our arrival. We halted awhile
at the fence and returned their compliments, when we were ordered to
advance.

We cleared the low fence at a bound, and made a rush for the rebel
line of skirmishers, who gave a parting volley and showed us their
gray backs, while we gave them every encouragement to go. We were then
halted and lay down while one of our batteries played over our heads,
shelling the opposite woods.

As it was nearly dark the firing soon ceased. I lay, for several hours,
by the stump which formed my temporary fortress, occasionally hearing
faint noises, as of some one moving stealthily.

_I kept awake!_ About midnight it grew still and I began to be
decidedly lonesome and crept over to a stump where I had seen a
comrade before it became dark--he was _gone_. The skirmishers had been
withdrawn silently, and I had been missed in the darkness, and was out
in the enemy’s country all alone.

_I went back for reinforcements_--cautiously, however, being fully
alive to the danger of being taken for a rebel, and of falling a victim
to mistaken identity. I had only gone a few steps when I heard the
cocking of a gun and the words “Haldt, who gooms dere.” I sung out
“Fortieth Ohio,” without delay, for those Dutchmen of the Ninety-sixth
Illinois had the reputation of shooting and _then_ saying halt.

I am glad they reversed the order in this instance. I was directed
to advance, and told that I would find Company B on their left: the
companies having been retired a few paces and closed upon the left,
which brought the Ninety-sixth boys in rear of my position.

About daylight we were ordered back to the brigade, then more than
a mile in our rear. This was our first taste of the great battle of
Chickamauga, of which we were destined to draw a full ration a little
later. It is significant that the Indian name “Chickamauga” means
“river of death.”

The next day we moved out in two lines of battle and encountered the
enemy at the same point. Our regiment, forming the left wing of the
front line, took position behind the fence I have before mentioned, and
began a musketry duel with the rebels, who were behind the fence on the
opposite side of the field. We fought there for an hour or two: the
bullets rattling against the fence, knocking the dust into our eyes and
making themselves generally disagreeable. I always like a bullet better
when it is lying still, or going the other way. Several of our company
were wounded: none I think were killed at this point. Our Captain was
wounded in the foot, and removed from the field early in the action,
leaving our Second Lieutenant in command of the company, who directed
me to take charge of the left flank, he remaining near the right of the
company. This gave me the privilege of standing up and overlooking the
work, instead of hiding behind the bottom rail of the fence as I felt
very much like doing.

Our company formed the extreme left of the line and in low ground, and
the line passing over a small hill we could not see the right of the
regiment.

After the fight had been going on for an hour or two, the rebels in
our front raised a yell and came tearing over the fence and across the
field toward us. This seemed to be our opportunity, and we commenced
issuing them rations of lead as fast as possible. When looking to the
right we saw our whole line on a regular stampede--disappearing into
the woods as if by magic. Four or five of us took trees and gave them
another round “for luck,” for we agreed that it was a shame to run
just as we had a chance to do some execution. We were rewarded by a
withering cross-fire from right and left, and looking around we saw the
rebels bearing down upon both sides of us. We were being enclosed as
in the jaws of death. The regiment had been flanked upon the right. A
movement that was concealed from us by the intervening hill.

We _went right away from there_. We went through the Chickamauga with
neatness and despatch.

As we emerged from the bushes on the west bank, we came upon the One
Hundred-and-fifteenth Illinois, drawn up in line, guns at a ready, a
thousand eager fingers trembling upon the triggers. We dropped and
crawled between their legs, and while we were struggling through, the
whole line opened fire with a terrific volley. Had we been a moment
later we would have got the full benefit of that volley, and this paper
would never have been written.

You may be sorry before I get through, but I’m glad I got through that
line as soon as I did.

Our line re-formed, but the whole brigade was forced to fall back, both
flanks having been turned by a greatly superior force. The retreat
was in good order, every foot of ground being contested for about two
miles, when we were reinforced by the Second Brigade and stayed the
tide until dark. We lay on our arms all that night. Next morning we
felt for the enemy all over the ground traversed by our forces the day
before: but he had vanished from our front. Gone to swell the mass that
was being formed with the intention of crushing that immortal hero,
Geo. H. Thomas.

All that day we heard the stertorous breathing of a terrible battle,
which was raging away to our right rear. About noon we took up our
line of march in a southwesterly direction, in a direct line for the
point where the clamor of war was most incessant. We moved with great
celerity through the forest and across the farms. No fences barred our
progress, for the presence of vast armies for several days had rendered
the country defenseless.

We soon came across signs of recent conflict, disabled cannon, dead
horses, mangled corpses, in both blue and gray, and all the bloody
paraphernalia of cruel war. Many of the dead were torn and blackened
and burned by bursting shell until the ghastly fragments were
indescribably shocking, and not at all calculated to encourage soldiers
who knew they were just going into battle, and were candidates for a
similar fate, with reasonable prospects of being elected. The hardest
part of a battle is going into it. Much worse than going out. I think
any thoughtful man upon going into battle, must go with a deadly
sadness at his heart. I have seen the thoughtless and fool-hardy go
in with a laugh and jest upon their lips, but they were not nearly so
apt to stand fire as those who advanced with pale cheeks and serious
aspect, for these had anticipated the danger and braced their nerves to
meet it, and the shock of battle did not come to them as a surprise.

Well, we were going into one of the most terrible battles of modern
times, and many of us began to realize it by this time. Off to the
south we could see the dense smoke of the battle, as well as hear the
crashing of musketry and the booming of artillery, and the shot and
shell began to pay their respects to us in a “way we despised.”

We were hurried along the rear of the battle line toward the right of
Gen. Thomas’ command, which was sorely pressed.

The firing of the musketry was so incessant that the ear could not
distinguish the separate discharges. Imagine a few hundred gushers, of
the gas well variety, all turned loose at once, and you will have as
good an illustration as you are likely to get in time of peace.

We were not allowed time to contemplate the battle as spectators.
Brannon’s division, holding the right, was being flanked by
Longstreet’s ten fresh brigades.

Already the troops on Brannon’s right were overwhelmed, and the enemy,
flushed with victory, was charging down upon the rear of his position,
when our two brigades were hurled into the “imminent deadly breach.”

It would seem as though every man realized that the fate of the array
depended upon this charge, and with the energy of desperation and “a
fury born of the impending peril, we charged the enemy,” and though he
“welcomed us with bloody hands to hospitable graves,” we faltered not,
until we had driven him back and formed our line extending along “Horse
Shoe Ridge”--a name rendered historic by the carnage of that terrible
Sunday afternoon, September 20th, 1863.

We were in two lines of battle, while the enemy was massed ten lines
deep in our front, and this heavy force was thrown against our slender
lines, in charge after charge of inconceivable fury. And more than once
during the afternoon our front line was driven back from the crest of
the ridge, over the rear line which was lying some thirty yards down
the northern slope, with bayonets fixed and “blood in their eye,” and
as soon as the front line passed over them, they would leap to their
feet, and with a yell and murderous volley, right in the teeth of the
rebel horde, would hurl them back as quickly as they came, regain the
vantage ground upon the ridge, while the other line would lie down and
hold themselves in readiness to return the compliment.

In this way, in a very little while, the whole hillside was thickly
carpeted with the dead and dying of both armies. The blue and the gray
intermingled in a frightful mixture of writhing agony and stark staring
death.

We soon, however, had our line firmly established upon the ridge, and
all the legions of Satan failed to prevail against us; so that night
found us still in triumphant possession of it, but at what a fearful
cost.

The official report places the loss of our two brigades, in this
action, from 2:00 P. M. until dark, at 44 per cent.

These two small figures contain a pathos which my pen has no power to
portray. We knew, however, that the enemy must have lost more men, as
their ten lines furnished more food for powder than our two.

If we overshot the front line our bullets had some chance of taking
effect later on. And thus the massing of the enemy which would have
told with fearful effect upon us, had they succeeded in breaking
through our lines, became a source of heavy loss to them under the
circumstances.

I have always been thankful that there was no Joshua present to stay
the downward course of the sun that day. For night found us with empty
cartridge boxes, though many had borrowed largely from the boxes of the
unresisting dead, who had no further use for them.

I fired eighty rounds from my breech-loading carbine, and the cartridge
chamber became so hot that I could not bear my hand upon it, and I was
actually afraid the thing would shoot back in my face when I would put
in a new cartridge.

Night put an end to the great battle of Chickamauga. At once a defeat
and victory for the Union army. A defeat, because we were compelled
to fall back to prevent being surrounded by superior numbers, leaving
the field, our dead, and many of our desperately wounded to the tender
mercies of the most cruel enemy of modern times. A victory, in that
Chickamauga, the bone of contention, remained in our hands.

In good order we marched back to Rossville, about half way from the
battle-field to Chattanooga.

I had reason to be thankful for the moderation of the pace, for one of
my shins had been used as a back-stop for an almost spent grape shot,
and I became very lame before reaching our place of bivouac. I was a
cripple for several days, and my limb bore a black spot for a month,
but no pension was the result. It did not even leave an honorable scar.

That night we took position on Missionary Ridge and awaited the
approach of the enemy, which was distinguished for that caution with
which the burned child approaches the fire. For they did not strike
our lines until about 3:00 P. M. next day, and then not hard enough
to drive in our pickets. Monday night, about midnight, we silently
moved down off the ridge and took position in hastily constructed
earthworks immediately around Chattanooga, leaving our picket line at
the foot of the ridge on the outside, to throw dust--or something--in
the eyes of the rebels as they felt for our position in the night. Next
morning, seeing the crest of the ridge clear, they moved suddenly upon
our pickets and easily gobbled them; as they had no chance for speedy
retreat up the steep side of the ridge. This is one of the saddest of
the fortunes of war--a picket line being abandoned, to certain capture,
as a vicarious sacrifice to secure the safety of an army. Our regiment
had thirty-six men and officers--the remnant of Company H--taken in
on this occasion, and they were given the freedom of the stockade
prison--inside the “dead line”--at Andersonville, where they spent the
winter in the full enjoyment of the luxuries of that famous place of
entertainment provided for them by fiends in human form, whose wanton
cruelty has made them the standing disgrace of the century in which
they lived, whose inhumanity has no parallel in civilized history,
and is not exceeded in the annals of _savage_ warfare. Our boys found
the kind attentions and high living so enervating as to be positively
unhealthy, for the following spring only fifteen of them left it alive,
and they were walking skeletons, half clothed in miserable rags.

On the 22d our brigade took position on Moccasin Point, on the north
bank of the Tennessee River, immediately opposite the frowning brow
of Lookout Mountain, where we guarded the river front and were at
liberty to contemplate the rare beauty of this magnificent specimen of
mountain scenery. Two miles in height of mountain slope! clad in the
many colored robe of autumn; its base laved by the pellucid Tennessee.
The songs of innumerable birds mingling with the rippling of the waters
in a gentle roundelay--punctuated at intervals by the staccato notes of
the festive rebel gun--followed by the not-too-gentle dropping of an
ounce of lead uncomfortably near the venturous Yank who protruded his
head beyond the bushes in order to enjoy the sylvan scene: reminding
him that there is no rose without its thorn.

This was starvation camp. For a full month we were on less than quarter
rations, and the normal condition of the stomach was ravenous. We soon
cleaned the cornfield down to the last sprouted nubbin on the ground.

After I had been hungry for about two weeks, I struck a teamster, who
had some corn for his mules; and begged him for an ear. He declined
as the mules were over-worked, hauling our rations over sixty miles of
mountain road. They were daily dying by scores, and there must be no
lack of rations for those that were still able to pull.

It was easier for a hungry soldier to pull a trigger, than for hungry
mules to pull a wagon load. My judgment accepted his reasoning, but my
appetite was not so easily convinced--so I bribed him with ten cents
to look the other way while I stole an ear. I ate it raw. It was good
enough that way, and I wasn’t proud.

I hope the mules enjoyed what was left, as well as I enjoyed that ear.

I have seen the boys dig the grains of corn from the stiff mud where
the mules had fed, and rubbing the mud off, eat them without parching.
They had the best of seasoning, a good appetite. We often thought with
the poet:

  “The melancholy days have come, the saddest of the year.”

On the 27th of October we were ordered down to Brown’s Ferry to
co-operate with a force who, before daylight that morning, had glided
down the river in a fleet of boats--rounding Moccasin Point, and
slipping past the rebel pickets without disturbing their rest, effected
a landing at the Ferry, and constructed a pontoon bridge on which we
crossed.

Here we waited, to hail the approach of, and smooth the way for,
General Hooker, who was moving up from Bridgeport, Alabama, with the
Eleventh and Twelfth Corps, driving the rebels out of the valley south
of the river, thus shortening our cracker line to twenty-two miles.

We lay guarding the approach to the Ferry; and soon the Veterans from
the Army of the Potomac began to file past. At this the battery of
twenty pounders on Lookout opened fire and rained their misshapen
fragments of iron around us in a very intrusive manner.

To be sure they were aimed at Hooker’s men, and not at us, who were
lying down; and if any of us were hit it should not count. But
unfortunately it did count with fatal effect to many a brave comrade.

The only sort of protection in our line was a large white-oak tree,
some distance to the right of our company, and I viewed with envy two
soldiers sitting on the safe side of that tree.

I very soon ceased to grudge them the position; for a shell burst close
beside them, a piece struck a gun, drove the breech pin through the
knee of one of them, and sent the naked barrel humming over our heads.
A large fragment struck the other man, tearing his arm off at the
shoulder, causing his death in about twenty minutes.

I was again reminded that there is no safe place in a battle. Presence
of mind is not so good as absence of body.

This movement brought us full rations whereat we greatly rejoiced. We
returned to our old quarters on Moccasin Point, and my bunk mate and
I slept for the second night in a house that we had just spent a month
in building. It consisted of pine poles driven into the ground to form
a stockade pen about six feet square, thatched with pine-feathers. A
luxurious bed of poles attached to the wall, padded with a feather
bed--(pine-feathers). A regular stone fire-place, with mud and stick
chimney. The roof consisted of the two sections of a dog tent.

Our kit of tools was composed of a hatchet, that wasn’t sharp from one
nick to another. I hope I shall have your sympathy when I say, that we
were ordered down the river next day and never saw that dandy soldiers’
rest again.

We next went into camp in Nickajack Cove--about two miles south of
Shell-Mound, a station on the Nashville & Chattanooga Rail Road, where
we built log cabins and again prepared our winter quarters.

Not far from this camp are several large caves. One is known as
Murrell’s cave, supposed to have been one of the hiding places of the
celebrated “Land Pirate,” John A. Murrell, who for years scourged this
part of Tennessee.

A party of us visited this cave, found it for the most part a narrow
tunnel through which flowed a shallow stream in which we had to wade a
portion of the way--occasionally widening into chambers, here and there
branching into lateral passages that wandered off into the vague and
shadowy regions of the dark. Two of us turned back before the rest of
the party, and as my comrade carried our only candle, I did not notice
how short it was--until the others were beyond ear shot--when we made
the startling discovery that we had not more than half enough to light
us out of the cave. We made all the haste, consistent with the state
of the roads and the preservation of our flickering light. But when we
were yet some two hundred yards from the mouth of the cave the last
drop of tallow was exhausted, and we looked upon that expiring dip, as
a man might gaze upon the dying face of a friend. For it left us in
total if not outer darkness.

We read of a darkness that once fell upon Egypt which was so thick that
it could be felt. Well I felt this darkness in my very soul.

We dare not move for fear of following some lateral passage and getting
out of the usual line of travel or of stumbling into some pitfall in
which the cave abounded. How long we stood there I know not. Long
enough to indulge in some very unpleasant conjectures that the rest
of party might run out of light and not be able to return to us, or
returning take some other route and “pass by on the other side.” Long
enough to feel convinced that the Scripture which says, “Men love
darkness rather than light” had no application to us. Long enough to
remember all the stories we had ever heard of people lost in these
caves, until starvation found them and claimed them for its own. After
we had become thoroughly uneasy, we heard another party coming in,
making the usual lot of noise, and it was only the most diligent and
vigorous use of our lungs that we got them to come to our assistance,
for they had actually turned and started out when they happened to get
still enough to distinguish our shouts from the roaring in their own
heads.

On emerging from the cave we procured a supply of candles and started
after our comrades who, just as we reached the entrance, appeared,
muddy and panting, with about a half an inch of candle in the party.

They were a little wiser than we were--about three fourths an inch.

Under the mountain on the west of our camp Nickajack, was Nickajack
cave, the largest in this region. Upon the mountain above is the point
where Georgia and Alabama join upon the south line of Tennessee. So
that within the darksome winding passages of the cavern, you can become
a tenant at will, of either of the three states. A good place to dodge
the Sheriff. The question of jurisdiction would be a perplexing one and
the dodger would have ample opportunity for keeping shady.

No wonder the highwayman, Murrell, had a fancy for this neighborhood.

About a dozen of us got leave of absence for a day, provided ourselves
with candles, provisions and hatchets, and set out for this cave. Near
its mouth was an old saltpetre manufactory, dismantled by the rebels
when compelled to abandon it. The nitre was obtained from a brown earth
brought from the cave--said to be very rich. This cave is provided with
the inevitable stream of water running through it, and the obvious
inference is that this is the active agent in producing the cave,--the
stream providing itself a channel through the heart of the mountain by
finding and dissolving out the softer portions. We entered a long flat
boat and were wafted by push poles some half mile into the cave where
we found our stream issuing from beneath some rocks too low for the
boat to pass under. We accordingly landed and began such an exploration
as our limited time would allow. The cavity divides and subdivides into
a vast number of passages which cross and recross each other, forming
a net work of dark alleys that are very bewildering. Some of them are
said to be over five miles in length.

We selected one and followed it to the end, marking with our hatchets
each branch or cross road--so that we might return the same way without
getting lost. Judging by the time consumed we must have traveled about
three miles. In places the ceiling came so low that we had to lie down
and walk like a snake a short distance, emerging a vast hall, perhaps
fifty by two hundred feet and from ten to thirty feet high. The
countless beads of moisture hanging from the stone ceiling would flash
back our lights with a sparkle suggestive of a cave of diamonds.

Our route alternated between narrow winding passages and immense
auditoriums--where an ordinary tone would be exaggerated into a roar.
In many of these the ceiling was hung with stalactites, resembling an
inverted forest, varying from the smallest quill-like pendant--through
all gradations of size to those that would weigh hundreds of pounds,
which when struck sharply with a hammer would sing out in tones like a
Cathedral bell.

I gathered a fine stalactite about the size and length of an ordinary
lead pencil, a perfect cylinder in shape, pure white and hollow for
half its length. I tried hard to preserve it, but it was very frail and
did not survive the fortunes of war.

We arrived at the end of our passage about noon, and there we ate our
dinner in a magnificent stone dining hall, in which a regiment could
eat without crowding. It was shady and cool.

Not far from where we dined was bat headquarters, where about a bushel
of these nocturnal birds had their rendezvous. Some were hanging to the
ceiling, others hanging to them, and others to them, &c., an inverted
cone of acro-bats.

We took a can, we had just emptied of peaches, and filled it with bats
and took them into camp as living witnesses of our visit to their home.
The first and last time I was ever engaged in the canning of meats.

And now we turn our faces toward the outer world. We turn our backs
upon the weird shadows, the damps and chills, the hanging forests of
stalactite creeping down slowly and surely, their brethren of the
stalagmite persuasion as slowly and surely creeping up; promising
a meeting which we cannot stay to witness. Leave behind us all the
grandeurs of the cavern, both brilliant and gloomy. Leave them in their
dungeon, to their “ways that are dark,” and turn toward the gladsome
sunshine. To the world of light and life and beauty.

Never before did the day burst upon me with such splendor. Emerging
suddenly from our six hours of constant groping among the shadows
of old night, and of wrestling with the powers of darkness, into
the golden glory of a Southern day; the brightness exaggerated by
the contrast, almost blinded us--and I realized, as never before,
how blind we are to the beauty and grandeur of this old world of
ours. Accustomed to appropriate it as a matter of course, we fail to
appreciate our priceless heritage. This warm-hearted mother earth which
not only nurtures us, but bears upon and within her bosom the countless
millions of extinct forms, which have been used as stepping-stones
along the route through all the ages leading up to us--and of all the
innumerable multitude, both living and dead, she crowns us King.

Let us justify her preference by opening the records that she holds for
our inspection, and reading the story of life. The road may be rough,
and the way may be long, but we shall reap if we faint not. We cannot
fail of our reward, but shall gather of the treasures of knowledge,
which science is ever ready to bestow upon her devotees.

Let her lead us down into the catacombs of the buried nations that have
preceded us; interpret for us the hand-writing upon the tomb stones,
and show us the fossil foot-prints of the Great Creator.

She will teach us nothing but God’s truth. Under her guidance we shall
find “tongues in trees, sermons in stones, books in the running brooks,
and good in everything.”

Under her interpretation the “mountains and the hills shall break forth
before us into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands.”

Let us now return from a contemplation of the inner treasures of earth
to the struggle for existence upon its surface.

On the morning of November 24th, 1863, we were again in front of
Lookout mountain. I wonder if you are as tired of it as I was.

We crossed Lookout creek upon a rude bridge composed of two logs laid
across and floored with fence rails, the water of the rapid mountain
stream boiling under the logs and gurgling among the rails--and ran our
line by the right flank up the mountain side.

Imagine a cloud-capped fortress with an army encamped upon its summit
and another army climbing its rugged slope. Holding in one hand the
trusty musket and with the other grasping bush, tree, rock, anything
that will assist the almost impossible ascent. Undismayed by the
herculean task before them, undaunted by rebel yells above them,
unappalled by the messengers of death that crash and howl about them,
the blue line creeps up and up and up, until the cloud receives
them out of sight, until the blue mingles with the gray in deadly
conflict,--when the cloud is rendered vocal with the thunder of war,
and such a storm cloud rages about the rocky coronet of old Lookout as
earth has seldom witnessed.

When our right flank reached the base of perpendicular rock which forms
the crown of this monarch of East Tennessee, we faced to the front and
swept the slope to the northeast, descending into ravines that furrow
the slope, climbing the opposite bank with infinite labor.

We make up for lack of speed, with yells, while the opposite mountain
sends back the echoing battle cry, until the rebels afterwards captured
said they thought there was a million of us.

And so we charged the main works at “Whitehouse farm.” The rebels
driven from the slope, here rallied, and stubbornly contested our
advance. From the top they dropped their bullets among us. The
artillery upon the summit sent their iron missiles screaming over us
and growled above our heads in impotent fury at their inability to
depress their muzzles so as to get our range. But we took the works
on the run; and in all, bagged over 2,000 prisoners. Down to the left
and front was a redoubt that was not carried with the rest of the
works, owing to a deep ravine intervening, and we began indulging in
some musketry practice upon the inmates which they were reciprocating
in kind, when our Major, Acton, stepped down into the ditch where I
was kneeling and proposed making an assault upon them. His light blue
overcoat presented a conspicuous mark; and I could hear the cruel zip
of the bullets that sought his life; and pulling his coat told him
to get down. At this instant I heard the fierce whack of the bullet
that pierced his heroic heart. He threw up his hands, and his cry of
mortal anguish rings in my memory still. I sprang to my feet and caught
him in my arms, easing him down; as his body sank upon my knee, I
felt his form quiver and become rigid in the death agony, and saw his
face receive the seal of the king of terrors. There fell a true hero.
Obedience to duty was his watchword.

He had lived a noble life, and died an honorable death, and fairly won
his promotion at the hands of our Supreme Commander.

About 4 P. M. we were relieved by the rear line who drove the rebels on
past the Whitehouse, into the timber beyond, and there kept up a heavy
skirmish firing half the night. Meantime we prepared a sumptuous repast
of bacon and hard-tack--coffee was barred--some of the boys lighted
fires, but quickly the order came “Fires out!” and they were encouraged
to prompt obedience by the dropping shot, which were attracted by the
light, gleaming through occasional rifts in the cloud.

We lay that night on the bleak mountain side, some 1500 feet above the
surface of the Tennessee; subject to the loving ministrations of a
driving sleet, which, carried as it was on a wind with forty miles of
clear sweep, felt sharp as needles to our faces. Happy were they who
had not left their blankets at the foot of the mountain.

Next morning we were aroused early and ordered to get breakfast.
Company B being informed that to it had been awarded the post of honor
of leading the forlorn hope up the Summertown road, a narrow road cut
through the rock leading to the top of the mountain, which would admit
about four men abreast, and we figured that as we marched up, in the
face of a desperate enemy, it would probably use up the last man of our
company before a landing could be effected. Under the protecting wing
of a friendly cloud we built fires and made coffee, of which we stood
in sore need, for, sore from yesterday’s exertions, shivering in our
breezy breakfast hall, as the chill gray dawn crept over us, and in the
absence of the enthusiasm of the active assault, the prospect before us
was anything but encouraging.

Just as we finished breakfast the cloud rolled away, and the sun
peering over the smoky mountains of North Carolina, gilded our mountain
top.

My first thought was “sharp-shooters,” and glancing up at the top
from whence the shots might be expected, I saw a little squad at the
extreme point, unfurling a flag. With breathless interest I watched the
opening folds of that flag, when out upon the wind floated the grandest
national standard that ever flapped in any breeze under the shining
sun. That emblem dearest to every loyal American heart: the glorious
Star Spangled Banner!

I lifted up my voice and yelled. At the same time the whole mountain
side resounded with huzzahs of joy and triumph. The one hundred
thousand veterans in the Chattanooga Valley sent back the answer like
a mighty echo, and there went up, tossed from crest to crest, and
mountain top to mountain top, a tremendous Yankee shout of victory,
proclaiming in thunder tones the triumph of “the battle above the
clouds!”

The whole situation had experienced a change. The sharp-shooters were
gone. We were relieved from that Summertown road business, and we held
the key to the rebel position in front of Chattanooga.

It is no derogation to the manhood of soldiers whose valor had been
fully proved, to say, that the tears of joy coursed down over many
a war-worn face. With surprising alacrity we were in line of march,
moving around and down the eastern slope, our minds attuned to the
enjoyment of the most picturesque view I ever beheld.

Before us lay the vast amphitheatre of the Chattanooga Valley. The
broad shining river curving around the north of the town, flashing the
sunlight from its bosom as it came, swept down until it struck the bed
rock beneath our feet, where turning sharply to the right it swept
between the cliff and the great toe of Moccasin Point, then turning
abruptly to the north, bathing the bottom of the gigantic foot as it
went, turned the mighty heel at Waldron Ridge.

The east and south bounded by the majestic crescent of Missionary
Ridge, buttressed upon the west by the cloud-hung battlements of
Lookout Mountain, clad in the variegated paraphernalia of autumn
foliage; the whole softly illuminated by the mellow radiance of an
Indian summer day, presented a picture that may be treasured in the
memory as one of nature’s masterpieces.

As we crossed the valley we had the pleasure of witnessing the
magnificent charge of the center as it moved out from the line of
Orchard Knob, crossed the intervening plain, flowed with a resistless
tide over the rifle pits at the foot of the ridge, and then, without
orders, every man his own commander, surged like a huge swarm of blue
flies up the rugged side of Missionary Ridge, while the half a hundred
rebel cannon bellowed overhead, frescoing the air with the smoke of
bursting shells. But up they went hurling the rebels from their vantage
ground upon the crest, and turning his own cannon upon him “sped the
parting guest,” stamping out the last vestige of rebel claim to the
Chattanooga Valley, and securing to the Union army permanent possession
of this great “gateway to Georgia.”

[Illustration]




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REMINISCENCES OF THE
CHATTANOOGA CAMPAIGN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
